{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.17134}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 Chapter 2\par
Information Systems to Enhance Business: Business Process Redesign\par
Information Systems to Enhance Business: Business Process Redesign\par
\ldblquote If you don\rquote t know where you\rquote re going, you might not get there.\rdblquote  \par
Yogi Berra\par
2.1 What Is a Business Process?\par
Learning Objectives\par
Identify a business process\par
Describe the difference between an As-Is and To-Be business process\par
Ask questions to elicit business process information from the client\par
Introduction\par
Every information system is designed to improve business in some way. However, before making an improvement, it is critical to understand the current business process. In this chapter we will develop a technique to diagram business processes. We will first diagram the current business process\f1\emdash the so-called As-Is process. After studying the process, we will be in a position to propose and diagram a future process\emdash the so-called To-Be process. If we have done our job well, the To-Be process will improve upon the As-Is process, making it more efficient, effective, user friendly, and so forth. In other words, every process improvement should move the business closer to achieving its goals.\par
Where Are We in the Life Cycle?\par
Many information systems projects are conceived of in a life cycle that progresses in stages from analysis to implementation. The diagram below shows the stages that we touch in the current chapter:\par
 \par
Goal Directed Activities.\par
Implicit in each current and future state are one or more business processes. A business process is a set of goal directed activities. In other words, a process describes the actions To-Be taken to accomplish a task. For example, applying to a university, filing taxes, and evaluating employees are all processes. The steps in applying to a university might include filling out an online form, submitting a credit card payment, requesting test scores be sent, and requesting that high school transcripts be sent.\par
Note that all of the processes mentioned above took place even before the advent of computers. Try to imagine how. Information systems simply transform the processes with the goal of making the process more efficient, convenient, effective, reliable, and so forth.\par
First, we represent the current (usually deficient) state As-Is process. Seeing the As-Is process diagrammed exposes obvious areas for improvement in the process. For example, many years ago students registered for classes in person. The As-Is process in that era might have shown a student waiting in line outside a large auditorium. When his turn comes up, the student enters the auditorium. There are tables representing each department staffed with faculty from that department. For each course that the student wishes to take, he must find the corresponding department table and add his name to the list for that class. Buying concert tickets followed a similar process before services like Ticket Master went online. People used to camp out for days in advance outside the Ticket Master office.\par
Sometimes information technology may improve processes, other times no technology is required. Sometimes the solution is as simple as providing information for individuals completing a business process at the appropriate time, or simply rearranging the steps in the business process, in which case, no new information technology is needed.\par
The redesigned and improved business process is called the To-Be process. This process takes into consideration the deficiencies identified in the As-Is process and the goals of the business. The area of work that focuses on improving business processes is called business process redesign. Individuals performing this work focus on understanding the As-Is process and how to improve it in the To-Be process.\par
Business Process Examples:\par
Shopping at a grocery store \par
The deli\par
Taking numbers\par
Rules about which products can be sliced on which machines\par
Rules about wrapping product after slicing\par
The fish counter\par
Taking numbers\par
Rules about how to prepare the fish\emdash head and tail off and so forth.\par
Checkout\par
Scanning and weighing procedures\par
Gathering customer data\par
Printing customized coupons\par
Optimal bagging\par
Taking payment\par
Shopping at an online retailer \par
Product display\par
Best selling\par
By price\par
By rating\par
Cross selling\emdash\ldblquote You might also like\'85\rdblquote\par
Shopping cart and checkout processes\par
Inventory management \par
Determining the inventory need\par
Reordering with supplier\par
Tracking and receiving shipments\par
Stocking shelves\par
Note that most business processes subsume other business processes. One of the toughest challenges is knowing what process to focus on and with what degree of granularity to zoom in on the process. Never lose site of the problem you are trying to solve\emdash and use that as your filter.\par
The Initial Client Meeting\par
Obviously, you can not diagram a business process without understanding the business. This will require meetings with the client. It is best to walk into those meetings with a willingness to listen rather than pretending that you know the client\rquote s business. Ask open ended questions and take lots of notes.\par
Those that design systems are called business analysts or consultants. Analysts begin their work with an initial client meeting. The quality of the questions asked at that meeting may well determine the success or failure of the project. Using the following four open ended questions can help in this consulting situation (Starr, 2010):\par
Current state: What does the client see as the current state of the situation/project?\par
Future state: What is the vision of the client for the end point of the situation/project?\par
Barriers: What barriers does the client envision will hinder reaching the vision?\par
Enablers: What is the client already doing to reach the vision? What does the client think will help?\par
Note that these questions capture the aspirations of the client as well as perceived barriers and enablers to reach that vision. The assumption here is that the client knows her business pretty well, and the goal of the initial meeting is to capture her knowledge and vision without jumping to a solution.\par
 \par
The initial client meeting for a home renovation project adding a second story to a home. Note the barriers, time and money, and the enablers, the crane and manpower. Business problems require a similar type of analysis. Never assume that you know these items. Give the client the opportunity to explain. It will save you a great deal of time in the final analysis.\par
Key Takeaways\par
A business process is a set of goal directed activities\par
The As-Is process captures the analysis of the current state of the business\par
The To-Be process captures the client\rquote s requirements for the future state of the business. Ultimately the To-Be process will be the measuring rod against which you will evaluate the completed system.\par
Questions and Exercises\par
Identify three business processes involved in the purchase of a car.\par
Describe how the process of going on a date changed with the introduction of online dating services such as Match.com. What do you see as the pros and cons?\par
2.2 Diagramming a Business Process\par
Learning Objectives\par
Create deliverables for the first two phases of the systems development life cycle\par
Create As-Is and To-Be process diagrams for the redesign of a business process\par
Given an advertisement, research and represent the business process redesign\par
Manipulate images and text to create a best practice diagram in PowerPoint\par
Choose and successfully employ PowerPoint techniques to solve a complex task\par
Actors and Actions\par
Improving a business process requires first understanding the process. Diagramming the steps in the process contributes greatly to that understanding. Business process diagrams typically consist of actions linked by arrows. However, it is also important to be clear about who is performing each action. For this reason we create a swim lane for each actor in the process. The actors pass a metaphorical baton among themselves at different stages of the process.\par
An easy way to diagram a business process is to first identify all of the actors and place each in a swim lane. The process begins at the top of the page and continues down the page following the arrows. Arrows represent communication among the actors, while diamonds represent decision points. While actors are normally people, a computer standing in for the role of a person can also be an actor.\par
At times we can simplify the business process diagram by eliminating all but the essential elements. This makes the diagram less cluttered and easier to read. On the facing page we have a process diagram reduced to just three elements \emdash  swim lanes, actions, and arrows.\par
For the level of analysis needed in this course, the simplified diagram is more than sufficient. However, it is good to know the full lexicon, especially the decision point diamond shown on the next page.\par
 \par
To-Be business process for IBM\rquote s package routing solution. In this solution Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags in the boxes communicate with their surroundings to report their geographic position back to the help desk. If a truck has taken the wrong turn, the boxes will notify the help desk. A help desk employee will in turn communicate by phone with the truck driver to reroute the truck.\par
It\rquote s More Complicated Than That\par
What we showed on the prior page is actually a simplified form of a business process diagram. For the purpose of this course, the simplified form works just fine. However for the sake of completeness, we show a more advanced diagram more in the spirit of Universal Modeling Language (UML). It is not that the UML style diagram is better\emdash just that you should be prepared to see it. The following table lists some of the symbols that you might encounter in a process flow diagram.\par
Table 2.1 \par
Action state\par
\par
 \par
An action taken in the flow\par
Start state\par
\par
 \par
A beginning of a flow; only one start state can be used\par
End state\par
\par
 \par
An end of a flow; any number of end states are allowed\par
Transition\par
\par
 \par
Indicates the control passing from one object to another\par
Decision point\par
\par
 \par
Showing possible options and paths to follow\par
Fork\par
\par
 \par
The beginning of parallel processes\par
Join\par
\par
 \par
The integration of parallel processes\par
Swim lane\par
\par
 \par
Represents ownership or assignment of a group of actions\par
Artifact\par
\par
 \par
An object involved in the system, such as a server or database\par
Key Takeaways\par
A business process can be diagrammed by showing actors in swim lanes taking actions. Communication or message passing among the actors is represented by arrows.\par
Questions and Exercises\par
Diagram the As-Is and To-Be processes before and after online dating.\par
 \par
Universal Modeling Language (UML) style As-Is process flow for recording grades.\par
Techniques\par
The following techniques, found in the PowerPoint section of the software reference, may be useful in completing the assignments for this chapter.: Layout-Change \bullet  Align \bullet  Shape-Insert \bullet  Text Box-Insert\par
L1 Assignment: Diagram Business Processes\par
Create As-Is and To-Be diagrams of a business process, given a video commercial. Many commercials on TV are really advertisements for improved business processes. IBM has been particularly active in this arena. IBM\rquote s focus on business process improvement makes sense given that IBM is one of the largest consulting organizations in the world. In this exercise, you will view a commercial on YouTube and then create the As-Is and To-Be business process diagrams that the commercial implicitly represents.\par
Setup\par
Start up PowerPoint.\par
Content and Style\par
Use the drawing tools in PowerPoint to create swim lanes and diagram the As-Is and To-Be business processes on separate slides.\par
Make sure you title each slide to identify which is which.\par
Align and space the content consistently. A sharp looking diagrams conveys professionalism.\par
Include a copyright symbol and your name in the bottom left corner.\par
When you are finished, submit the PowerPoint file according to your professor\rquote s instructions. Your professor may want hard copy or an electronic submission to the course management system.\par
Deliverable\par
Electronic submission: Save your file as a PowerPoint presentation. Submit it electronically.\par
Paper submission: Create a printout by printing the slides directly out of PowerPoint.\par
 \par
Sample To-Be deliverable for the IBM RFID trucking commercial.\par
 Previous Chapter \par
 Table of Contents \par
Next Chapter  \f0\par
}
 